Introduction
************

The world is currently going through a phase transition. And there is a future to be had on the other side that has the potential to make all of the greatest achievements in all of our greatest myths seem like trivialities compared to the world we could experience.

But we will never get there, and all that we have will fall to ruin, if we do not integrate a very basic truth into our collective intelligence.  
Everyone experiences Reality as at least a duality. There is Personal reality, and there is Shared reality.  

We must remember, at all times, that all language is metaphorical. The sounds and symbols we use to communicate are not literally the same as that which we are communicating about. For example, what you, who you call I, think of when you see the symbol I is not literally the same as what I think of when I see the symbol I. Because of this, it is difficult to communicate certain basic truths. But it is not impossible. The words I will use will not mean literally the same thing to you as they do to me. My intention is to avoid digging into the contents of any individual’s Personal reality, or any group’s Shared reality. But if the mechanics I’m talking about seem familiar, please hear me out.  
   

Personal reality and Shared reality
===================================

It is easier to discuss this starting in Personal reality. As defined here, Personal reality is Reality as united by the metaphorical thread that ties together all of an individual’s lived experience. In Personal reality, the one constant in every experience, every thought, every feeling, is you, who you call I. Personal reality is Reality with you, who you call I, at its center. 

Personal reality is defined by certain components and certain mechanics. I will use some metaphors to discuss those components and mechanics, and I will call them out when I do. The first metaphor is that personal reality is a standing wave in some container. The nature, shape, and properties of the standing wave can be affected by many things, including the shape of the container, the material of the container, and the material of the medium where the standing wave forms. Similarly, the nature, shape, and properties of the standing wave are sensitive to changes to the shape of the container, movement of the container, and many other things.    

Within that standing wave, there are several components. These components interact in many ways, but they share a common loop mechanic, and they all exist in parallel. It is important to understand that these components do not interact linerly. There is no A+B=C mechanic where component A interacts with component B to produce some known alteration of the standing wave. Component A can interact with component B to make outcome C more likely or less likely, but it is impossible to guarantee outcome C, with certain obvious exceptions. Obviously it is fairly easy to ensure the destruction of the standing wave, but particular outcomes within the functioning system generally operate as probabilities rather than predictable constants. 

Think of the second metaphor, which is a probability cone. Probability cones occur within the standing wave of Personal reality. From any given moment in any individual’s Personal reality, there are a finite number of actions, thoughts, feelings, experiences, decisions, expressions, states, etc. that are physically possible of occurring within any arbitrary length of time starting from the given moment. Obviously some things that can possibly occur to any human, or even to the individual in our example, can be physically impossible of occurring depending on the given moment in question. All of the finite possibilities in any given moment are dependent on and determined by our example’s starting point: the specifics of the given moment. 

Likewise, the range of possibilities is dependent on and determined by the length of time in question. Any individual’s personal reality as represented by a probability cone contains more possibilities over a longer time span than a shorter time span.  

The starting point of this example also determines which possibilities are more likely to actually occur and which possibilities are less likely to occur. This is the first probability cone: Everyone reading this at any given moment will be Human, unless we do some really crazy shit in the future. This is a very small probability cone. It is neither a certainty, nor does it contain many possibilities. However, even in an infinite multiverse, a bowl of petunias will never read this document. All probability cones are bounded. 

The structure of the probability cone is best understood metaphorically as a projectile traveling along linear time. The probability cone always has its point in the present. The probability cone has inertia; that is, the past trajectory of the probability cone has some influence over which probabilities are more or less likely to actually occur. The past is not a probability cone. It is just what happened in any individual’s personal reality. The origin of the probability cone also necessarily has some influence over which probabilities are more or less likely to occur. The simplest example of this is time. A person born in 2001 necessarily exists in a very different reality than a person born in 1001. There are certain experiences, modes of expression, and other things that a person born in 2001 might potentially have that would be impossible for a person born in 1001 to have. There are also certain experiences, modes of expression, and many other things that are more or less likely to occur in reality depending on whether a person was born in 1001 or 2001. 

Two key mechanics of both Personal reality and Shared reality are consciousness and loops. Reality is not defined by what an individual is conscious of, or aware of. Both Personal reality and Shared reality exist consciously and unconsciously. Another way of saying this is that Reality is not necessarily dependent on consciousness. One does not have to be aware of a thing to be influenced by it. However, both Personal reality and Shared reality are to some degree sensitive to consciousness. When an individual is aware of the influence that some thing has on Reality, there may be some way for the individual to modify the influence of that thing. In all things there is an element of certainty and an element of choice.       

This first mechanic is illustrative of the second mechanic. The second mechanic is a loop in which every individual simultaneously creates and is created by their Personal reality. Individuals have some ability to act, think, and feel in ways that make certain outcomes within a cone of probability more likely or less likely. Consider this like changing the distribution of weights on our metaphorical projectile to influence its trajectory through linear time. In this way, an individual creates their Personal reality by creating, removing, expanding, and contracting various probability cones within their Personal reality. But individuals do not have the ability to act, think, or feel in ways that make any and all possible outcomes within the entire scope of Human existence accessible within their Personal reality. A very simple example of this is that there is nothing a person born in 1001 can do that results in that individual making a video call on a smartphone. However arbitrarily large or small the fractal probability cone of an individual’s Personal reality happens to be, it is necessarily bounded by, among other things, the origins and conditions of their individual existence. 

With these mechanics and metaphors in mind, let’s explore the components of Personal reality. Again, these components do not interact linearly. They all exist in parallel. Individuals may be conscious or unconscious of certain elements of any component. Every component creates and is created by every other component. And the interactions of the components can modify the state of the standing wave that is Personal reality within the structure of bounded probability cones.  