Personal reality
****************

Personal reality includes at least the following components: the basic human experience, individual experience, narrative, identity, sensemaking, desires and dreams, and expression. 

Basic human experience
======================

The basic human experience consists of at least the physical body and the state, number, and function of its own components (genes, nerves, organs, chemicals, limbs, etc.) that form the internal environment in which you, who you call I, reside. No two individuals’ basic human experience is exactly the same. The obvious differences are genetic, or physically visible. Other differences can include things like individual neurochemistry and epigenetic history. But everyone’s basic human experience shares some commonalities. All people breathe. Everyone poops. So far, everyone born has also died eventually. 

The basic human experience is an emergent phenomenon that arises from the state of being human, as opposed to being a plant or a cat. Just as all cats are more similar to other cats than they are to apes, all humans are all more similar to other humans than they are to any other species or organization of matter. If there is a root of Personal reality, it is this. That which is I is inseparable and indistinguishable from your, which you call my, physical form. 

Individual experience
=====================

Individual experience is literally everything that an individual has experienced for as long as they have been alive up until the present moment. Individual experience must never be confused with empirically verifiable phenomena. Individual experience does include empirically verifiable phenomena, but many individual experiences are not empirically verifiable. Individual experiences that are not empirically verifiable are no less part of Personal reality than individual experiences that are empirically verifiable. 

While the basic human experience is somewhat generalized, individual experience is highly specific. Even experiences that might seem to be very similar between individuals are not literally the same experience. As a simple example, think of two individuals attending a concert from the standing area in front of the stage. Many factors differentiate their individual experiences, including their prior knowledge of the music they hear, their individual relationships with the performers, what proportion of their disposable income they spent on the tickets, and their height. As another example, think of having a biological mother. Even twins of the same parents will not have literally the same experience of having a mother. 

Individual experience is roughly cumulative. Consciously or unconsciously, experiences that occur earlier in an individual’s life metaphorically carry more weight within the probability cone of an individual’s Personal reality than experiences that occur more recently in an individual’s life. This is the probability cone as a projectile traveling through linear time. Small shifts near the origin can have large effects on the projectile’s long term trajectory. 

Equally true is that individual experience is roughly additive. Consciously or unconsciously, experiences that occur more recently in an individual’s life metaphorically are larger building blocks in the standing wave of an individual's Personal reality than experiences that occur earlier in an individual’s life. This is the standing wave responding to changes in its composition and environment. Small shifts in the present can have large effects on the standing wave’s long term form. 
 
Narrative
=========

Narrative can be thought of as an interface layer. Narrative is the complete and comprehensive description of relationships, conscious or unconscious, within an individual’s Personal reality. Narrative is also the comprehensive description of relationships between an individual’s Personal reality and their Shared reality as experienced in their Personal reality. Narrative is not a description of Shared reality, except insofar as it is a description of an individual’s experience in Shared reality. 

Narrative is both learned from and emergent from individual experience. Narratives can be learned. For example, many narratives are inherited, consciously or unconsciously, from culture, family, and society. Narratives can also be emergent. For example, many narratives emerge, consciously or unconsciously, to orient an individual within the context of their individual experience, both in Personal reality and in Shared reality. 

It is overly simplistic to say that narrative is a set of beliefs. Narrative is an equal and parallel component of Personal reality, just as the basic human experience and individual experience are. Because narrative is the description of relationships within an individual’s Personal reality, changing the narrative that describes a relationship is literally the same as changing the experience of the relationship itself within an individual’s Personal reality. This power should not be underestimated. 

The common use of narrative here can be misleading. A narrative that an individual doesn’t fully believe to be true is just a story. A narrative that an individual does fully believe to be true is reality. The narrative, truly believed, is an equal and parallel component of Personal reality, of equal consequence as any empirically verifiable phenomena an individual might experience.  

Identity
========

Identity is that which is I. If there is a center of Personal reality, it is this. It is the one constant, the orientation point, that unites any individual’s Personal reality. For any individual, it is also the orientation point for Shared reality. Identity is the mechanism by which we distinguish Personal reality from Shared reality. It is the state of being, and the sense of being discrete from all else in Personal reality. This is reflected in phrases like “my body” or “my brain” or “my soul,” as if these things are distinct from I, as if the relationship between an individual’s body and their identity is one of ownership of the former by the latter. 

What should be becoming clear is that identity is an emergent property of Personal reality, just as Personal reality itself is an emergent phenomenon arising from the confluence of its components. Identity emerges from the loop mechanic of creating and being created by the components of an individual’s personal reality. 

Identity works differently in Shared reality than it does in Personal reality. In Shared reality, there can be no meaningful discussion of any individual’s identity that is separate from that individual’s personal narratives and personal experiences. Yet for an individual, their identity, as experienced within their own Personal reality, is in fact discrete from their experiences and conscious narratives. While identity is the orientation point of Personal reality, it is not in any sense the genesis point of Personal reality.

To be clear, identity as defined here is not the same as the conscious narratives that an individual uses to describe the relationships that individual has with themselves, within themselves, and with the world. Identity is that which is I. Part of identity is conscious, and includes narratives that orient an individual within their Personal reality, and other parts of identity are unconscious. Part of identity emerges from Shared reality as experienced in Personal reality, and part of identity emerges from Personal reality alone.

Sensemaking
===========

Sensemaking, like narrative, can be thought of as an interface layer. It is the set of algorithms that creates priorities, evaluations, and decisions within an individual’s Personal reality. It is the suite of tools that makes sense of an individual’s Personal reality. Sensemaking enables individuals to orient and organize their experiences and identity within the context of their personal narratives.

Many systems of sensemaking exist for many different purposes, but all systems of sensemaking share common properties. Sensemaking is reinforced: the more sense a decision makes, the more likely an individual is to make similar decisions in the future. Sensemaking is adaptive: decisions that convey benefits in Personal reality make more sense than decisions that are detrimental. It is extremely important to note that what counts as sense, benefit, and detrimental can be infinitely varied from person to person. What sense, benefit, or detriment feel like, or what things can be considered to make sense, or convey benefit or detrimient, within any individual’s Personal reality is not literally the same from one individual to another. 

That said, within an individual’s Personal reality, sensemaking systems are usually internally consistent. However, they are not necessarily consciously consistent. Sensemaking happens both consciously and unconsciously, both when considering inputs and producing outputs. Individuals do not have to be aware that they are making decisions to make decisions. Likewise, individuals do not have to be conscious of the comprehensive benefits, detriments, inputs, or outputs of their sensemaking systems. 

Generally, things that are familiar make more sense than things that are unfamiliar. To revisit a metaphor, sensemaking has a bias towards inertia or stability when we consider Personal reality as a projectile traveling through linear time. To revisit another metaphor, within the probability cone that is an individual’s Personal reality, things that make more sense are more likely to actually occur. Things that make more sense are closer to the axis of the probability cone, or closer to the extrapolated trajectory of the projectile, than they are to the edges of the probability cone. Consciously or unconsciously, this biases Personal reality toward that which is known and familiar over that which is unknown and unfamiliar.              

Desires and dreams
==================

If individual experience is about what was, and narrative is about what is, desires and dreams are about what could be. I use these terms together because desires and dreams are sensitive to both consciousness and agency. Agency, as defined here, is the ability for an individual to consciously add, remove, expand or contract the probability cones that constitute their Personal reality. Literal dreams, which occur during REM sleep, are not what I am referring to here, although I do believe that literal dreams are both an important part of and a way to learn about one’s Personal reality. 

Desires can be thought of as the product of sensemaking. Through sensemaking systems, various aspects of Personal reality aquire some selective emphasis that allows an individual to make decisions, priorities, and goals, and for various aspects of Personal reality to become more or less desirable, important, etc. This is not a linear process; what makes a thing desirable at any given moment depends on the totality of an individual’s Personal reality at the moment in question.  

Desires, like sensemaking, are adaptive. Desires that are more likely to convey benefit are themselves more desirable than desires that are detrimental, with all of the caveats about desire, benefit, and detriment as stated before about sensemaking. 

Dreams, as defined here, are something like imagined future states for an individual’s Personal reality. That which I am referring to as dreams are perhaps the most difficult of all components of personal reality to accurately describe. Here above all, please look for the pattern I describe rather than the the literal meaning of my words. 

Dreams are not the same as narrative, which is the description of relationships, even if one dreams of a changed relationship. Dreams can be slippery and dreams can be sticky. Dreams can be conscious or unconscious. Dreams are difficult to describe because dreams, as consciously experienced in personal reality are necessarily bounded by an individual’s consciousness. But as we have established, consciousness only encompasses parts of Personal reality. So dreams, which are something like imagined future states of an individual’s Personal reality, as consciously experienced in Personal reality are not necessarily indicative that an individual desires the contents of the dream to become part of that individual’s Personal reality. But dreams as consciously experienced in Personal reality are part of an individual’s Personal reality, and both create and are created by an individual’s Personal reality.     

Expressions
===========

Expressions are literally everything that an individual that an individual does, thinks, and feels. Expressions are an interface layer, like narrative and sensemaking. Expressions are the bridge between that which is I, and literally everything else in an individual’s Personal reality. Expressions are also the foundation of Shared reality. Expressions are the bridge from Personal reality to Shared reality. What we experience as humans interacting with other humans is other individuals’ expressions of their own Personal reality. 

There are at least two types of expressions in any individual’s Personal reality: internal expressions and external expressions. Internal expressions are how an individual expresses themselves solely within their Personal reality. External expressions are how an individual expresses themselves in any and all Shared realities. 

Here is where it is easiest to see how all components of Personal reality exist and interact in parallel, creating and being created by everything else in an individual’s Personal reality. Both internal expressions and external expressions are acts of synthesis, wherein every component of an individual’s personal reality informs the mode, method, manner, type, contents, timing, etc. of an individual’s expressions. And when an individual expresses themselves, however they do so, consciously or unconsciously, that expression then becomes part of their individual experience. Once expression becomes the experience of expression, that experience can interact with other components of an individual’s Personal reality (experiences, narrative, identity, sensemaking, and desires and dreams), creating and being created by the totality of that individual’s Personal reality.  

This mechanic might be obvious for external expressions. For example, assume that for various reasons that make perfect sense in an individual’s Personal reality, an individual expresses themselves by coloring their hair. That act of expression interacts with that individual’s Personal reality in both subtle and obvious ways. That individual’s sensemaking systems, and therefore their desires and dreams, adapt to that individual’s new reality of having colored hair. This in turn can have effects on that individual’s identity, their narratives about relationships in both Personal and Shared reality, and even the experiences they have as an individual with a new hair color. 

Less obvious is that the same mechanic exists for internal expressions. Internal expression is not identical to internal, conscious narrative, although the two are deeply intertwined as parallel components of Personal reality. Narrative is the complete and comprehensive description of relationships within an individual’s Personal reality. Internal expressions are what an individual does, thinks, and feels within their Personal reality. Internal narratives can affect internal expressions, and vice versa, but they are not the same thing. For example, assume that for various reasons that make perfect sense in an individual’s Personal reality, an individual expresses themselves by consciously thinking in English. (*need to elaborate on this: thinking in a language bounds the thoughts an individual is capable of having to those that have English language equivalents, etc. Also might need a different example).

Personal reality summary
========================

Hopefully there has been an element of obviousness to at least some of the components and mechanics we’ve discussed so far. Many people throughout history have described similar things in various ways, although usually more eloquently and artistically than I am doing here. However, no one who I am aware of actually thinks of Reality in the segmented, categorical way that we are discussing here because the lived experience of Reality is fluid, subtle, and appears to be universal, like clear, still air in a prescientific world.

This illusion that Reality is literally the same from one individual to the next is an inexact, usually-good-enough workaround of the truth. But because the duality of Personal reality and Shared reality is so subtle, there are a great many places where a single Shared reality can create wildly divergent experiences in individuals Personal realities without any conscious perception of those differences by any individual. We discuss the structure, functions, and mechanics of the second, parallel component of Reality in the next section. 