The Peregrine Amendment
***********************

I have often wondered what this is, both as a concept and as a project. The handful of people who have indulged me in conversation about this concept have asked what any of this means, or what it is for, or how it can be used. 

The simplest answer that comes to mind is to try to somehow internalize that Personal reality and Shared reality don't always have the same rules. Not all Shared realities have the same rules either. Learning what the rules are in any particular Personal or Shared reality can empower an individual to enact change in Reality. 

Classical science is the premier example of this. Empirical observation of falsifiable information through experimentation has given us access to most of the dizzying array of technologies and capabilities we have today.

But as established elsewhere, any individual's Reality consists of more than that which is empirically verifiable. 

I'll have to expand this section later, but there are many known mechanisms to shape Personal and Shared reality which are not empirically verifiable. The obvious examples here include some religions, drugs, events, and social environments. While all of these mechanisms can produce empirically observable effects in individuals, the holistic effect those mechanisms have on an individual's reality is not empirically verifiable. For example, the actual individual experiences that an individual has, the particular way those experiences filter through any particular individual's sensemaking systems, and how that individual fits those experiences and valuations in their personal narrative are all very real, yet elude scientific rigor. 

In a limited way, this means magic exists. 

Mechanisms which modify Personal reality without any empirically observable side effects still modify Personal reality. If an individual feels the flow of qi or the Hand of God, or sees insight in tarot or microdosing LSD, the fact that their literal individual experience cannot become part of Shared reality does not make that experience any less real, or any less part of their Personal reality.        

To me, concepts like morals or qi are similar to concepts like laws or economics. They are real, no doubt. Humans can interface with these concepts to modify Reality. The ways in which these concepts can and do affect any individual's Personal reality or any group's Shared reality varies depending on the particular concept, the way an individual or group understands and applies the concept, and the ways that concept interacts with all other aspects of an individual's Personal reality or a group's Shared reality. 

That leads to two questions: one of awareness, and one of choice. 

First, what mechanisms, tools, concepts, etc. that can shape Reality are you, who you call I, willing to admit actually do shape Reality? (Curating experiences, examining/recreating narratives, adopting/adhering to sensemaking systems, modes of expression/communication)

Second, how do you, who you call I, use/consider/approach those mechanisms now, and are you satisfied with the outcome?

   

 