An outline for A Handbook for Humans
************************************

Introduction
============

The world is currently going through a phase transition. And there is a future to be had on the other side that has the potential to make all of the greatest achievements in all of our greatest myths seem like trivialities compared to the world we could experience.

But we will never get there, and all that we have will fall to ruin, if we do not integrate a very basic truth into our collective intelligence.  
Everyone experiences Reality as at least a duality. There is Personal reality, and there is Shared reality.  

We must remember, at all times, that all language is metaphorical. The sounds and symbols we use to communicate are not literally the same as that which we are communicating about. For example, what you, who you call I, think of when you see the symbol I is not literally the same as what I think of when I see the symbol I. Because of this, it is difficult to communicate certain basic truths. But it is not impossible. The words I will use will not mean literally the same thing to you as they do to me. My intention is to avoid digging into the contents of any individual’s Personal reality, or any group’s Shared reality. But if the mechanics I’m talking about seem familiar, please hear me out.  
   

Personal reality and Shared reality
===================================

It is easier to discuss this starting in Personal reality. As defined here, Personal reality is Reality as united by the metaphorical thread that ties together all of an individual’s lived experience. In Personal reality, the one constant in every experience, every thought, every feeling, is you, who you call I. Personal reality is Reality with you, who you call I, at its center. 

Personal reality is defined by certain components and certain mechanics. I will use some metaphors to discuss those components and mechanics, and I will call them out when I do. The first metaphor is that personal reality is a standing wave in some container. The nature, shape, and properties of the standing wave can be affected by many things, including the shape of the container, the material of the container, and the material of the medium where the standing wave forms. Similarly, the nature, shape, and properties of the standing wave are sensitive to changes to the shape of the container, movement of the container, and many other things.    

Within that standing wave, there are several components. These components interact in many ways, but they share a common loop mechanic, and they all exist in parallel. It is important to understand that these components do not interact linerly. There is no A+B=C mechanic where component A interacts with component B to produce some known alteration of the standing wave. Component A can interact with component B to make outcome C more likely or less likely, but it is impossible to guarantee outcome C, with certain obvious exceptions. Obviously it is fairly easy to ensure the destruction of the standing wave, but particular outcomes within the functioning system generally operate as probabilities rather than predictable constants. 

Think of the second metaphor, which is a probability cone. Probability cones occur within the standing wave of Personal reality. From any given moment in any individual’s Personal reality, there are a finite number of actions, thoughts, feelings, experiences, decisions, expressions, states, etc. that are physically possible of occurring within any arbitrary length of time starting from the given moment. Obviously some things that can possibly occur to any human, or even to the individual in our example, can be physically impossible of occurring depending on the given moment in question. All of the finite possibilities in any given moment are dependent on and determined by our example’s starting point: the specifics of the given moment. 

Likewise, the range of possibilities is dependent on and determined by the length of time in question. Any individual’s personal reality as represented by a probability cone contains more possibilities over a longer time span than a shorter time span.  

The starting point of this example also determines which possibilities are more likely to actually occur and which possibilities are less likely to occur. This is the first probability cone: Everyone reading this at any given moment will be Human, unless we do some really crazy shit in the future. This is a very small probability cone. It is neither a certainty, nor does it contain many possibilities. However, even in an infinite multiverse, a bowl of petunias will never read this document. All probability cones are bounded. 

The structure of the probability cone is best understood metaphorically as a projectile traveling along linear time. The probability cone always has its point in the present. The probability cone has inertia; that is, the past trajectory of the probability cone has some influence over which probabilities are more or less likely to actually occur. The past is not a probability cone. It is just what happened in any individual’s personal reality. The origin of the probability cone also necessarily has some influence over which probabilities are more or less likely to occur. The simplest example of this is time. A person born in 2001 necessarily exists in a very different reality than a person born in 1001. There are certain experiences, modes of expression, and other things that a person born in 2001 might potentially have that would be impossible for a person born in 1001 to have. There are also certain experiences, modes of expression, and many other things that are more or less likely to occur in reality depending on whether a person was born in 1001 or 2001. 

Two key mechanics of both Personal reality and Shared reality are consciousness and loops. Reality is not defined by what an individual is conscious of, or aware of. Both Personal reality and Shared reality exist consciously and unconsciously. Another way of saying this is that Reality is not necessarily dependent on consciousness. One does not have to be aware of a thing to be influenced by it. However, both Personal reality and Shared reality are to some degree sensitive to consciousness. When an individual is aware of the influence that some thing has on Reality, there may be some way for the individual to modify the influence of that thing. In all things there is an element of certainty and an element of choice.       

This first mechanic is illustrative of the second mechanic. The second mechanic is a loop in which every individual simultaneously creates and is created by their Personal reality. Individuals have some ability to act, think, and feel in ways that make certain outcomes within a cone of probability more likely or less likely. Consider this like changing the distribution of weights on our metaphorical projectile to influence its trajectory through linear time. In this way, an individual creates their Personal reality by creating, removing, expanding, and contracting various probability cones within their Personal reality. But individuals do not have the ability to act, think, or feel in ways that make any and all possible outcomes within the entire scope of Human existence accessible within their Personal reality. A very simple example of this is that there is nothing a person born in 1001 can do that results in that individual making a video call on a smartphone. However arbitrarily large or small the fractal probability cone of an individual’s Personal reality happens to be, it is necessarily bounded by, among other things, the origins and conditions of their individual existence. 

With these mechanics and metaphors in mind, let’s explore the components of Personal reality. Again, these components do not interact linearly. They all exist in parallel. Individuals may be conscious or unconscious of certain elements of any component. Every component creates and is created by every other component. And the interactions of the components can modify the state of the standing wave that is Personal reality within the structure of bounded probability cones.  

Personal reality
================

Personal reality includes at least the following components: the basic human experience, individual experience, narrative, identity, sensemaking, desires and dreams, and expression. 

The basic human experience consists of at least the physical body and the state, number, and function of its own components (genes, nerves, organs, chemicals, limbs, etc.) that form the internal environment in which you, who you call I, reside. No two individuals’ basic human experience is exactly the same. The obvious differences are genetic, or physically visible. Other differences can include things like individual neurochemistry and epigenetic history. But everyone’s basic human experience shares some commonalities. All people breathe. Everyone poops. So far, everyone born has also died eventually. 

The basic human experience is an emergent phenomenon that arises from the state of being human, as opposed to being a plant or a cat. Just as all cats are more similar to other cats than they are to apes, all humans are all more similar to other humans than they are to any other species or organization of matter. If there is a root of Personal reality, it is this. That which is I is inseparable and indistinguishable from your, which you call my, physical form. 

Individual experience
---------------------

Individual experience is literally everything that an individual has experienced for as long as they have been alive up until the present moment. Individual experience must never be confused with empirically verifiable phenomena. Individual experience does include empirically verifiable phenomena, but many individual experiences are not empirically verifiable. Individual experiences that are not empirically verifiable are no less part of Personal reality than individual experiences that are empirically verifiable. 

While the basic human experience is somewhat generalized, individual experience is highly specific. Even experiences that might seem to be very similar between individuals are not literally the same experience. As a simple example, think of two individuals attending a concert from the standing area in front of the stage. Many factors differentiate their individual experiences, including their prior knowledge of the music they hear, their individual relationships with the performers, what proportion of their disposable income they spent on the tickets, and their height. As another example, think of having a biological mother. Even twins of the same parents will not have literally the same experience of having a mother. 

Individual experience is roughly cumulative. Consciously or unconsciously, experiences that occur earlier in an individual’s life metaphorically carry more weight within the probability cone of an individual’s Personal reality than experiences that occur more recently in an individual’s life. This is the probability cone as a projectile traveling through linear time. Small shifts near the origin can have large effects on the projectile’s long term trajectory. 

Equally true is that individual experience is roughly additive. Consciously or unconsciously, experiences that occur more recently in an individual’s life metaphorically are larger building blocks in the standing wave of an individual's Personal reality than experiences that occur earlier in an individual’s life. This is the standing wave responding to changes in its composition and environment. Small shifts in the present can have large effects on the standing wave’s long term form. 
 
Narrative
---------

Narrative can be thought of as an interface layer. Narrative is the complete and comprehensive description of relationships, conscious or unconscious, within an individual’s Personal reality. Narrative is also the comprehensive description of relationships between an individual’s Personal reality and their Shared reality as experienced in their Personal reality. Narrative is not a description of Shared reality, except insofar as it is a description of an individual’s experience in Shared reality. 

Narrative is both learned from and emergent from individual experience. Narratives can be learned. For example, many narratives are inherited, consciously or unconsciously, from culture, family, and society. Narratives can also be emergent. For example, many narratives emerge, consciously or unconsciously, to orient an individual within the context of their individual experience, both in Personal reality and in Shared reality. 

It is overly simplistic to say that narrative is a set of beliefs. Narrative is an equal and parallel component of Personal reality, just as the basic human experience and individual experience are. Because narrative is the description of relationships within an individual’s Personal reality, changing the narrative that describes a relationship is literally the same as changing the experience of the relationship itself within an individual’s Personal reality. This power should not be underestimated. 

The common use of narrative here can be misleading. A narrative that an individual doesn’t fully believe to be true is just a story. A narrative that an individual does fully believe to be true is reality. The narrative, truly believed, is an equal and parallel component of Personal reality, of equal consequence as any empirically verifiable phenomena an individual might experience.  

Identity
--------

Identity is that which is I. If there is a center of Personal reality, it is this. It is the one constant, the orientation point, that unites any individual’s Personal reality. For any individual, it is also the orientation point for Shared reality. Identity is the mechanism by which we distinguish Personal reality from Shared reality. It is the state of being, and the sense of being discrete from all else in Personal reality. This is reflected in phrases like “my body” or “my brain” or “my soul,” as if these things are distinct from I, as if the relationship between an individual’s body and their identity is one of ownership of the former by the latter. 

What should be becoming clear is that identity is an emergent property of Personal reality, just as Personal reality itself is an emergent phenomenon arising from the confluence of its components. Identity emerges from the loop mechanic of creating and being created by the components of an individual’s personal reality. 

Identity works differently in Shared reality than it does in Personal reality. In Shared reality, there can be no meaningful discussion of any individual’s identity that is separate from that individual’s personal narratives and personal experiences. Yet for an individual, their identity, as experienced within their own Personal reality, is in fact discrete from their experiences and conscious narratives. While identity is the orientation point of Personal reality, it is not in any sense the genesis point of Personal reality.

To be clear, identity as defined here is not the same as the conscious narratives that an individual uses to describe the relationships that individual has with themselves, within themselves, and with the world. Identity is that which is I. Part of identity is conscious, and includes narratives that orient an individual within their Personal reality, and other parts of identity are unconscious. Part of identity emerges from Shared reality as experienced in Personal reality, and part of identity emerges from Personal reality alone.

Sensemaking
-----------

Sensemaking, like narrative, can be thought of as an interface layer. It is the set of algorithms that creates priorities, evaluations, and decisions within an individual’s Personal reality. It is the suite of tools that makes sense of an individual’s Personal reality. Sensemaking enables individuals to orient and organize their experiences and identity within the context of their personal narratives.

Many systems of sensemaking exist for many different purposes, but all systems of sensemaking share common properties. Sensemaking is reinforced: the more sense a decision makes, the more likely an individual is to make similar decisions in the future. Sensemaking is adaptive: decisions that convey benefits in Personal reality make more sense than decisions that are detrimental. It is extremely important to note that what counts as sense, benefit, and detrimental can be infinitely varied from person to person. What sense, benefit, or detriment feel like, or what things can be considered to make sense, or convey benefit or detrimient, within any individual’s Personal reality is not literally the same from one individual to another. 

That said, within an individual’s Personal reality, sensemaking systems are usually internally consistent. However, they are not necessarily consciously consistent. Sensemaking happens both consciously and unconsciously, both when considering inputs and producing outputs. Individuals do not have to be aware that they are making decisions to make decisions. Likewise, individuals do not have to be conscious of the comprehensive benefits, detriments, inputs, or outputs of their sensemaking systems. 

Generally, things that are familiar make more sense than things that are unfamiliar. To revisit a metaphor, sensemaking has a bias towards inertia or stability when we consider Personal reality as a projectile traveling through linear time. To revisit another metaphor, within the probability cone that is an individual’s Personal reality, things that make more sense are more likely to actually occur. Things that make more sense are closer to the axis of the probability cone, or closer to the extrapolated trajectory of the projectile, than they are to the edges of the probability cone. Consciously or unconsciously, this biases Personal reality toward that which is known and familiar over that which is unknown and unfamiliar.              

Desires and dreams
------------------

If individual experience is about what was, and narrative is about what is, desires and dreams are about what could be. I use these terms together because desires and dreams are sensitive to both consciousness and agency. Agency, as defined here, is the ability for an individual to consciously add, remove, expand or contract the probability cones that constitute their Personal reality. Literal dreams, which occur during REM sleep, are not what I am referring to here, although I do believe that literal dreams are both an important part of and a way to learn about one’s Personal reality. 

Desires can be thought of as the product of sensemaking. Through sensemaking systems, various aspects of Personal reality aquire some selective emphasis that allows an individual to make decisions, priorities, and goals, and for various aspects of Personal reality to become more or less desirable, important, etc. This is not a linear process; what makes a thing desirable at any given moment depends on the totality of an individual’s Personal reality at the moment in question.  

Desires, like sensemaking, are adaptive. Desires that are more likely to convey benefit are themselves more desirable than desires that are detrimental, with all of the caveats about desire, benefit, and detriment as stated before about sensemaking. 

Dreams, as defined here, are something like imagined future states for an individual’s Personal reality. That which I am referring to as dreams are perhaps the most difficult of all components of personal reality to accurately describe. Here above all, please look for the pattern I describe rather than the the literal meaning of my words. 

Dreams are not the same as narrative, which is the description of relationships, even if one dreams of a changed relationship. Dreams can be slippery and dreams can be sticky. Dreams can be conscious or unconscious. Dreams are difficult to describe because dreams, as consciously experienced in personal reality are necessarily bounded by an individual’s consciousness. But as we have established, consciousness only encompasses parts of Personal reality. So dreams, which are something like imagined future states of an individual’s Personal reality, as consciously experienced in Personal reality are not necessarily indicative that an individual desires the contents of the dream to become part of that individual’s Personal reality. But dreams as consciously experienced in Personal reality are part of an individual’s Personal reality, and both create and are created by an individual’s Personal reality.     

Expressions
-----------

Expressions are literally everything that an individual that an individual does, thinks, and feels. Expressions are an interface layer, like narrative and sensemaking. Expressions are the bridge between that which is I, and literally everything else in an individual’s Personal reality. Expressions are also the foundation of Shared reality. Expressions are the bridge from Personal reality to Shared reality. What we experience as humans interacting with other humans is other individuals’ expressions of their own Personal reality. 

There are at least two types of expressions in any individual’s Personal reality: internal expressions and external expressions. Internal expressions are how an individual expresses themselves solely within their Personal reality. External expressions are how an individual expresses themselves in any and all Shared realities. 

Here is where it is easiest to see how all components of Personal reality exist and interact in parallel, creating and being created by everything else in an individual’s Personal reality. Both internal expressions and external expressions are acts of synthesis, wherein every component of an individual’s personal reality informs the mode, method, manner, type, contents, timing, etc. of an individual’s expressions. And when an individual expresses themselves, however they do so, consciously or unconsciously, that expression then becomes part of their individual experience. Once expression becomes the experience of expression, that experience can interact with other components of an individual’s Personal reality (experiences, narrative, identity, sensemaking, and desires and dreams), creating and being created by the totality of that individual’s Personal reality.  

This mechanic might be obvious for external expressions. For example, assume that for various reasons that make perfect sense in an individual’s Personal reality, an individual expresses themselves by coloring their hair. That act of expression interacts with that individual’s Personal reality in both subtle and obvious ways. That individual’s sensemaking systems, and therefore their desires and dreams, adapt to that individual’s new reality of having colored hair. This in turn can have effects on that individual’s identity, their narratives about relationships in both Personal and Shared reality, and even the experiences they have as an individual with a new hair color. 

Less obvious is that the same mechanic exists for internal expressions. Internal expression is not identical to internal, conscious narrative, although the two are deeply intertwined as parallel components of Personal reality. Narrative is the complete and comprehensive description of relationships within an individual’s Personal reality. Internal expressions are what an individual does, thinks, and feels within their Personal reality. Internal narratives can affect internal expressions, and vice versa, but they are not the same thing. For example, assume that for various reasons that make perfect sense in an individual’s Personal reality, an individual expresses themselves by consciously thinking in English. (*need to elaborate on this: thinking in a language bounds the thoughts an individual is capable of having to those that have English language equivalents, etc. Also might need a different example).

Personal reality summary
------------------------

Hopefully there has been an element of obviousness to at least some of the components and mechanics we’ve discussed so far. Many people throughout history have described similar things in various ways, although usually more eloquently and artistically than I am doing here. However, no one who I am aware of actually thinks of Reality in the segmented, categorical way that we are discussing here because the lived experience of Reality is fluid, subtle, and appears to be universal, like clear, still air in a prescientific world.

This illusion that Reality is literally the same from one individual to the next is an inexact, usually-good-enough workaround of the truth. But because the duality of Personal reality and Shared reality is so subtle, there are a great many places where a single Shared reality can create wildly divergent experiences in individuals Personal realities without any conscious perception of those differences by any individual. We discuss the structure, functions, and mechanics of the second, parallel component of Reality in the next section. 

Shared reality
==============

Shared reality is defined as any overlap of any aspect of two or more individuals’ Personal realities. A key difference between Shared reality and Personal reality is the manner in which Shared reality is structured. Shared reality has neither root nor center. It is composed of conscious and unconscious external expressions and individual experiences. In all cases, any individual’s Personal reality makes up exactly half of any Shared reality that individual experiences. The other half of any Shared reality is made up by the collective and representative expressions and experiences of other members of the Shared reality, as experienced in an individual’s Personal reality.        
          
This is a critical point. Empirically verifiable phenomena are so called because any arbitrary individual can have an experience that is empirically identical to another individual’s experience. For example, think of any simple empirical measurement, such as finding the length of a dowel rod. In many individuals’ Personal realities, there is a narrative which describes the relationship of units of measurement to physical objects. Any individual can use that narrative to express the results of their measurement. Given a common understanding of the narrative and a fixed physical object, the measurement is identical regardless of which individual actually acts to take the measurement. This is the triangulation that takes place: An individual finds the result of a measurement (experiences an event) in their Personal reality and expresses that measurement into Shared reality. The expressions of other individuals in Shared reality about the same event, as experienced by the individual, corroborate the measurement experienced in their Personal reality. The consistency and precision with which this corroboration occurs is the measure by which some thing or event can be said to be empirically verifiable. When an event is literally the same regardless of who experiences the event or when they do, the event is empirically verifiable.  

Yet clearly Reality does not consist solely of that which is empirically verifiable. Many Shared realities are formed when aspects of individuals’ Personal realities that are not empirically verifiable overlap. For example, think of any simple human relationship, like that between a barista and a customer. In many individuals Personal realities, there is a narrative that describes the relationship between baristas and customers. Any individual can use that narrative to express the expectations and experiences they have in and for that relationship. But the experiences and expectations of any individual in that relationship do not necessarily have to be the same or even similar to those of any other individual. Those two individuals can have a successful, mutually beneficial (or disastrous and destructive) experience in the Shared reality formed by their simple relationship regardless of whether their individual understanding of the relationship has anything in common with the other individual’s understanding. They can walk away from the interaction with very similar, or wildly divergent experiences. It is their interaction itself that creates Shared reality, regardless of whether any part of the interaction was empirically verifiable.

Shared reality is formed by the overlap and interaction of individuals’ Personal realities. These interactions can be simple, subtle, and empirically verifiable. For example, all humans share the reality of breathing the same atmosphere (at least most of the time, at least for now). Shared reality can also be formed from interactions that are complex, obvious, and are not empirically verifiable. For example, many individuals share a reality of religion, or nationality, or social standing. Shared reality is formed from conscious interactions and unconscious interactions. Regardless of the scale or function of the interaction, or the awareness of any individuals in that interaction of the interaction, Shared reality emerges when Personal realities overlap.  

Mechanics of Shared reality
---------------------------

TBD

